Summer's almost over and school is about
to start again, but I think there's time
to go cruising up and down the streets
of Modesto one last time, so my question
today is... Where were you in 62?
Hi I'm Jeff and welcome to A Million
Movies. Today we're gonna talk about some
little-known facts about one of my
favorite summer films, the 1973 classic from
George Lucas, American Graffiti. So let's
get started.
One thing about American Graffiti that
people may not know is that it's in part
an autobiographical film from George
Lucas. He took inspiration for three of
the characters from his own life.
The first was Terry the Toad. Terry
represents George when he was a freshman in high
school. He admits he was awkward. He was nervous around girls, and that's the
character that Terry represents. As
George moved into later years of high school,
and then on to junior college, he got
very involved with the custom car
culture around Modesto. And that character at that time of his life inspired the
character of John. And John is involved
in hot rods and street racing just
like George was during those years. And
the final character inspired by George
Lucas's own life is Curt, played by
Richard Dreyfuss. And that that character
represents George as he was moving on in
his life becoming much more serious and
moving on to study at USC. The shooting
schedule and the budget limitations that
George Lucas worked under are legendary.
He shot the film about 28 or 29 days. His
total budget was $775,000. The
budget came from Universal Pictures and
American Graffiti was part of a series
of films that Universal greenlit in the
early seventies. They'd seen the success
of what they call sort of semi-independent
films like Easy Rider and
they decided to greenlight five films
that would be made for less than a
million dollars. The directors would have
a little bit of autonomy to come up with
something creative and different and
then they would be released and
hopefully generate enough profit to keep
the program going. The other films in the
series besides American Graffiti were
The Hired Hand, The Last Movie, Taking Off, and Silent Running. All of those were part
of this special program that
Universal Pictures have put out.
Now what was going on with this was
that George had to find ways to be really
efficient both with time and money, and
he did a couple of things that really
helped with that. The first was that he
shot, often in the dialogue scenes in
particular, with two cameras. So instead of having multiple setups where he would
have to move the camera around and readjust the lights,
he worked it so he had both cameras shooting at the same time. Hugely efficient for
getting both sides of the action at the
same time, and shooting the scenes just one
or two times and then moving on to the
next one. Another way George Lucas was
able to save money was he got a crew
that worked very cheap, and a lot of
them worked for free.
Instead of being paid, George Lucas
promised them that he would give them a
title credit in the movie. Now in 1973,
only department heads typically would
get their credit with their name at
the end of the movie or beginning of the
movie, so given the opportunity to have your name actually in the movie was a big
deal for a lot of these crew members and
they accepted the deal. They said that we won't
get paid and will work on your film, but we
are excited to see oour name up in
the movie. Now because budgets and time
were so tight
there are a couple of instances where
things that weren't in the script
happened and George Lucas liked what
happened and decided to keep it and use
that first take. A couple of examples I
can point to... at the beginning of the
film, for example, Charles Martin Smith
who plays Terry the Toad is pulling up
to Mel's Drive-In on his Vespa, but he
loses control and slams into the
building. That wasn't in the script, but
George Lucas liked it. It added a bit of
humor and a little bit of surprise.It
was the first take, you got it, let's move
on and get the next scene.
Another example of this happening was
when Carol, played by Mackenzie Phillips, is
in the car with John, played by Paul Le Mat, and a group of girls pull up beside
them and throw water balloons. The
water balloon was supposed to hit the
side window next to
Mackenzie Phillips and splash her in the
face. Instead it hits her full in the
face. Instead of being angry like the
script called for her to be, she can't help but laugh.
George liked the way the reaction came
across. He thought it was genuine, didn't
affect the story too much, and he kept it as
a first take. A third example of
how this happened is when
Terry is trying to get money from Debbie
at the liquor store and Candy is waiting
for him in the car and as he comes back.
She asks, "Did you get it... you get it... you
get... you got it." But she flubbed the line
and she went to George Lucas and said I want to reshoot that scene because I flubbed the
line. And George said no, it's fine let's go.
Moving on. So there are great scenes where the takes were not perfect, but they were
real, and because of the tight schedules and tight budgets, George Lucas said that's
good, that's good, let's go and we'll go
to the next shot.
Harrison Ford and George Lucas would of
course team up to make Star Wars a few
years later, but in this movie, Harrison
Ford's role is relatively small. And
George Lucas went to him and said
Harrison, I'd really need you to cut your
hair. Your hair is too long for a
character in 1962. Harrison
responded that my role is too small for
me to cut my hair for, but I'll make a
deal with you, I'll wear a hat.
George Lucas agreed and
Harrison became the cowboy of
American Graffiti. If there's a narrator
of American Graffiti it's probably the
Wolfman Jack character as the DJ on the
radio. He was cast specifically because
George Lucas remembered hearing Wolfman Jack on the radio when he was in high
school living in Modesto and he wanted
him to be part of this movie.
It reignited Wolfman Jack's career. He
became a pretty big
celebrity in 1970's because
of his role in American Graffiti. And
there's actually a scene in this movie
where Wolfman Jack makes a prank phone
call to a pizza place, and on the other
in the line it's actually George Lucas
answering the phone.
One of the things that we might
not think is unique today, but was unique
in 1973, is actually the soundtrack.
Before American Graffiti, and a few years
earlier, Easy Rider did this is well,
soundtracks were primarily music written
specifically for that movie. With
American Graffiti, George Lucas
identified 40 different songs that were
of the time period...
that you would have heard in 1962, that
he wanted to include in the film and use
that as the soundtrack. The studio
really had a problem with that.
Getting the rights to all those songs
and paying the fees to use them was
going to jack up the costs and the budget of this film. They really pushed back hard.
It wasn't until George Lucas' friend,
Francis Ford Coppola, decided to come on
as a producer and throw in more money
to the budget that the studio agreed to
let George Lucas use the songs that he
wanted to use. Now today, using oldies in
a soundtrack isn't as big a deal. You'd
hear the songs in movies from The
Big Chill and Dirty Dancing.
The songs are being used in movies all the way to today, but in 1973 it was pretty unusual
and was something that the studio really
pushed back hard on. In the sock hop scene,
you've got Steve played by Ron Howard
dancing with Lori, who is played by Cindy
Williams. As they start to dance, you can
hear the announcer make an announcement
that this is a snowball dance.
"Last year's class president, Steve Bolander, and this year's head cheerleader, Lori Henderson."
A snowball dance is one where two people
start to dance and then they break apart
to find other partners, bring them on to the
dance floor, and then after a few seconds
those two couples break apart and bring
other people dance floor. That continues
to repeat until everybody's back on the
dance floor. Now the dialogue between
Steve and Lori is so intense that they
never break apart even though they're the only
two people dancing. So if you watch the
kids in the background, you can actually
see them start to get a little anxious
waiting for their turn to join the dance.
The executives at Universal were not
crazy about the title American Graffiti.
They didn't think the public would know what it meant and they wouldn't be able to sort
of associate it with this film. They
suggested a movie title...
Another Slow Night in Modesto. Francis Ford Coppola suggested Rock Around The Block,
but obviously George Lucas
pushed back and was able to keep the movie
with his original title in mind, which
was American Graffiti. One of the great
scenes of American Graffiti was actually
improvised. It's the scene towards the end
where John and Terry are talking after the
drag race where Falfa has wrecked his car.
Terry comes over to congratulate him and
John says... he was admitted he was losing.
"No, I was losing it."
"What?" "He had me, man. He was pulling away from me but just before it crashed."
"You're crazy. I saw it now, you creamed him from right off the line. I think he never had a chance."
That scene was scheduled to be shot at
another time. The actors hadn't prep for it,
so when it got moved up, they totally
just improvised the scene and shot it right
there. To give the movie more
authenticity, George Lucas really wanted to
make sure there were lots of cars on the
streets, so he put out a call to the
people in the cities where they shot
requesting that if they had older cars,
classic cars, to come out - and some were
paid $25 a night for the use of their car.
The locals really got into the
shooting and made the the shoot
more like what cruising was like in 1962.
Between takes, there were even some drag
races that happened up and down the
streets, so it was sort of like going
back in time. The entire scene was like it was in 1962 even though it was 1973.
George Lucas was able to include an
internal reference, an inside joke, in
American Graffiti. The one that most
people know about is the license plate
on John's car. If you look at it it says
THX 1138.
This is a reference to George Lucas'
previous film which was THX 1138, and
that license plate is now actually on
display at Skywalker Ranch, the
Lucasfilm's headquarters in Marin County.
There's a pretty famous story about
Universal's reaction to seeing the film.
They really didn't like it. They didn't
know what to do with it and, in fact, they
put it on a shelf for six months while
they tried to figure it out.
They went and did a screening of it at
Northpoint Theater in San Francisco and
the crowd loved it, it got a great response.
The head of Universal was actually there
and even after seeing the crowd response,
he still didn't know what to do with it.
Francis Ford Coppola, who had come on as a producer of the film, immediately turned
to the head of Universal and offered to
buy the film from Universal on the spot.
Universal had second thoughts. They
decided to release the film,
and i'm pretty sure they're glad they did.
It made 35 million dollars on a
$775,000 investment. They made 35
million, which is a pretty good turn
around and really cemented George
Lucas' career as a writer and a director.
The poster for American Graffiti has a very distinctive style,
and if you recognize that, there's a good
chance you're like me and we're a reader
of Mad Magazine when you were young. The artist of this poster is
Mort Drucker, and Mort Drucker was a long
time artist on Mad Magazine. One sort of
the coincidental thing about this was in
addition to drawing this poster, Mort
Drucker had to draw the art that went
along with the the the parody that they
did of America Graffiti when they did the
parody in Mad Magazine. So he did the poster
and the parody. After American Graffiti,
Ron Howard and Cindy Williams were
actually reunited in television. Ron
Howard had gotten the role of Richie
Cunningham on Happy Days, and when Garry Marshall decided to do a spin-off of two
girls from Milwaukee, he brought in
Cindy Williams along with his sister
Penny Marshall to be Laverne and Shirley.
So there are actually great episodes of
Ron Howard and Cindy Williams reunited
on the cast, on the set of Happy Days.
So those are my little known facts about
American Graffiti. Thank you for sticking
through it. I really appreciate it.
Let's go to the countdown. Today we
talked about The Hired Hand, The Last
Movie, Taking off, Silent Running,
Easy Rider... I mentioned The Big Chill and
Dirty Dancing.
We referenced THX 1138,
and of course we talked about American
Graffiti. That brings our total down to
999951. That's it for today. I really
appreciate you joining me for this
episode about American Graffiti. If you
enjoyed this video, I hope you watch my
other ones and perhaps subscribe to this
channel. That would really help me out. If
you have any comments, feedback,
or suggestions... anything... please put in the comments section below. I'd love to read
that, and hopefully I'll see you on the
next episode of A Million Movies.